Gromacs md command and explanation 

1. Create configuration and topology file

gmx pdb2gmx -f receptor.pdb -o receptor.gro -ignh

This command converts the protein structure file (receptor.pdb) into a Gromacs compatible format (receptor.gro). The -f option indicates input coordinate file, -o potion indicates output configuration file, the -ignh option ignores hydrogen atoms in the PDB file.

gmx editconf -f ligand.pdb -o ligand.gro

This command creates a Gromacs compatible structure file (ligand.gro) for the ligand from the given PDB file (ligand.pdb). Instead of using Gromacs, you can choose ligpargen to prepare configuration and topology file of small molecules (https://traken.chem.yale.edu/ligpargen/).

2. Insert ligand into receptor topology file

gmx insert-molecules -f receptor.gro -nmol 26 -ci ligand.gro -o complex.gro

This command inserts 26 copies of the ligand (from ligand.gro) into the receptor structure (receptor.gro) and creates a new file (complex.gro) containing the complex.

 
Then, Go to the topology file (topol.top) , #include "ligand.itp" should be added below #include ".ff/forcefield.itp", to include the ligand topology parameters.

3. Create a simulation box

gmx editconf -f complex.gro -o newbox.gro -bt cubic -box 8.0 8.0 8.0

This command creates a cubic simulation box (newbox.gro) with dimensions 8.0 x 8.0 x 8.0 nm around the complex (complex.gro).

4. Add water molecules

gmx solvate -cp newbox.gro -cs spc216.gro -p topol.top -o newbox_sol.gro

This command solvates the system by adding water molecules (from spc216.gro) around the complex (newbox.gro) using the topology information (topol.top). The resulting solvated system is written to newbox_sol.gro.

5. Add ions

gmx grompp -f ions.mdp -c newbox_sol.gro -p topol.top -o ions.tpr

This command creates a portable binary run input file (ions.tpr) from the solvated system (newbox_sol.gro) and the molecular dynamics parameter file (ions.mdp) using the topology information (topol.top).

6. Neutrilize the system
 
gmx genion -s ions.tpr -o newbox_sol_ions.gro -p topol.top -pname NA -nname CL -neutral

This command adds ions (NA and CL) to neutralize the system by replacing water molecules with ions. The -neutral option ensures that the net charge of the system is zero. 

7. System Minimization

gmx grompp -f em.mdp -c newbox_sol_ions.gro -p topol.top -o em.tpr

This command creates a portable binary run input file (em.tpr) for energy minimization using the energy minimization parameters defined in the em.mdp file. The input files are the solvated and ionized system (newbox_sol_ions.gro) and the topology file (topol.top).

mdrun -v -deffnm em

This command performs the actual energy minimization simulation using the input file created in the previous step (em.tpr). The -v option enables logging, and -deffnm em specifies the output file prefix as "em".

8. Make Index File for Ligand

gmx make_ndx -f ligand.gro -o index_ligand.ndx 

This command creates an index file (index_ligand.ndx) for the ligand structure (ligand.gro). The Gromacs index file contains some user definable sets of atoms. The index file is used to select groups of atoms for specific operations. gmx view index_ligand.ndx command can read the file.

> 0 & ! a H*
> q

These commands select all atoms except hydrogen atoms and exit the interactive session.

gmx genrestr -f ligand.gro -n index_ligand.ndx -o posre_ligand.itp -fc 1000 1000 1000

This command generates a position restraint file (posre_ligand.itp) for the ligand atoms using the ligand structure (ligand.gro) and the index file (index_ligand.ndx). The -fc option specifies the force constants for the position restraints (1000 kJ/mol/nm^2 in this case).

After this, you need to include the generated position restraint file (posre_ligand.itp) in the topology file (topol.top) by adding the following lines at the end of the topology file, after 

"; Include Position restraint file
#ifdef POSRES
#include "posre.itp"
#endif

; Ligand position restraints
#ifdef POSRES
#include "posre_LIG.itp"
#endif

9. Make Index File for System

gmx make_ndx -f em.gro -o index.ndx

This command creates an index file (index.ndx) for the energy-minimized system (em.gro).

> 1 | 13
> q

These commands select the first group (protein) or the 13th group (ligand) and exit the interactive session. 

10. NVT Equilibrium

gmx grompp -f nvt.mdp -c em.gro -r em.gro -p topol.top -n index.ndx -maxwarn 2 -o nvt.tpr

This command creates a portable binary run input file (nvt.tpr) for NVT (constant Number of particles, Volume, and Temperature) equilibration using the parameters defined in the nvt.mdp file. The input files are the energy-minimized structure (em.gro), topology file (topol.top), and index file (index.ndx). The -r option specifies the structure file to be used as a reference for generating velocities. The -maxwarn 2 option suppresses some non-critical warnings.

gmx mdrun -deffnm nvt

This command runs the NVT equilibration simulation using the input file created in the previous step (nvt.tpr). 

11. NPT Equilibrium


gmx grompp -f npt.mdp -c nvt.gro -r nvt.gro -p topol.top -n index.ndx -maxwarn 2 -o npt.tpr

These commands create a portable binary run input file (npt.tpr) for NPT (constant Number of particles, Pressure, and Temperature) equilibration using the parameters defined in the npt.mdp file and the input files (nvt.gro, topol.top, index.ndx). 

gmx mdrun -deffnm npt

12. MD Production Run

gmx grompp -f md.mdp -c npt.gro -t npt.cpt -p topol.top -n index.ndx -maxwarn 2 -o md.tpr

The command create a portable binary run input file (npt.tpr) for MD using the parameters defined in the md.mdp file The -t option specifies the checkpoint file (npt.cpt) to be used for continuing the simulation from the NPT equilibration step.

gmx mdrun -deffnm md


13. Recentering and Rewrapping Coordinates

gmx trjconv -s md.tpr -f md.xtc -o md_center.xtc -center -pbc mol -ur compact

This command recenters and rewraps the trajectory (md.xtc) using the input file (md.tpr). The -center option centers the system around the specified group (prompted to choose "Protein" for centering), the -pbc mol option removes the periodic boundary condition effects, and the -ur compact option writes a compact trajectory file (md_center.xtc).

gmx trjconv -s md.tpr -f md_center.xtc -o start.pdb -dump 0
This command extracts the first frame (t = 0 ns) of the recentered trajectory (md_center.xtc) and writes it to a PDB file (start.pdb).

14. Calculate Energy

gmx energy -f md.edr -o energy1.xvg
xmgrace -nxy energy1.xvg

These commands calculate the energy components from the energy file (md.edr) and write the output to a file (energy1.xvg). The xmgrace command opens the Grace plotting tool to visualize the energy components.

15. RMSD (Root Mean Square Deviation)

gmx rms -s md.tpr -f md_center.xtc -o rmsd.xvg
gmx rms -s md.tpr -f md_center.xtc -o rmsd.xvg -tu ns

These commands calculate the RMSD (Root Mean Square Deviation) of the system relative to the reference structure (specified in md.tpr) using the recentered trajectory (md_center.xtc). The -tu ns option sets the time unit to nanoseconds.

1
13

xmgrace rmsd.xvg

These commands prompt you to select groups for RMSD calculation (1 for protein and 13 for ligand), and then open the Grace plotting tool to visualize the RMSD plot.

16. RMSF (Root Mean Square Fluctuation)

gmx rmsf -s md.tpr -f md_center.xtc -o rmsf.xvg

1

These commands calculate the RMSF (Root Mean Square Fluctuation) of the system using the recentered trajectory (md_center.xtc). You are prompted to select the group for RMSF calculation (1 for protein).

xmgrace rmsf.xvg

This command opens the Grace plotting tool to visualize the RMSF plot.

17. Hydrogen Bonds

gmx hbond -s md.tpr -f md_center.xtc -num hb.xvg
gmx hbond -s md.tpr -f md_center.xtc -num hb.xvg -tu ns
1
13
xmgrace hb.xvg

These commands calculate the number of hydrogen bonds between the specified groups (1 for protein and 13 for ligand) using the recentered trajectory (md_center.xtc). The -tu ns option sets the time unit to nanoseconds. The output is written to the hb.xvg file, which is then visualized using the Grace plotting tool.

18. Gyration Radius

gmx gyrate -s md.tpr -f md_center.xtc -o gyrate1.xvg
xmgrace gyrate1.xvg

These commands calculate the radius of gyration of the system using the recentered trajectory (md_center.xtc) and write the output to the gyrate1.xvg file. You are prompted to select the group for calculating the radius of gyration. The output is then visualized using the Grace plotting tool.


